.\" ========================================================
.TH WAK 1 "2024-11-04" "24.10 20241008"
.\" ========================================================
.SH NAME
wak \(em an implementation of the awk programming language
.\" ========================================================
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wak
[
.BR \-F
sepstring
] [
.BR \-v
assignment
]... program [ argument... ]
.br
or
.br
.B wak
[
.BR \-F
sepstring
]
.BR \-f
progfile
[
.BR \-f
progfile
]...
.br
.ti 20n
[
.BR \-v
assignment
]... [ argument... ]
.br
also:
.br
[
.BR \-V ,
.B \-\^\-\^version
]
[
.BR \-h ,
.B \-\^\-\^help
]
[
.BR \-b
]
[
.BR \-c
]
.\" ========================================================
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B wak
is an implementation of the awk programming language,
primarily as described by POSIX.1-2024 (also known as
IEEE Std 1003.1\[tm]-2024 Edition and
The Open Group Standard Base Specifications, Issue 8),
with a few omissions and additions.
.PP
This document does not attempt to describe the awk language.
The POSIX specification may be seen at
https://pubs.opengroup.org/onlinepubs/9799919799/utilities/awk.html .
Please consult that document for a complete description.
.\" ========================================================
.SH OPTIONS
.TP +15n
.BR \-F \ sepstring
Input field separator; may be a regular expression
.TP
.BR \-v \ assignment
An assignment expression of the form var=string_value; the
assignment precedes the start of execution of the program. The
right-hand side is taken as a string.
.TP
.BR \-f \ progfile
Pathname of an awk program file. More than one program file may be
specified, treated as if concatenated.
.TP
.BR \-V ,\  \-\^\-\^version
Display the program version and exit successfully.
.TP
.BR \-h ,\  \-\^\-\^help
Display a brief help screen and exit successfully.
.TP
.BR \-b
Treat input files as bytes rather than UTF-8 characters. (This
option is experimental.)
.TP
.BR \-c
Compile the program to internal format but do not execute.  Can be
used to check for syntax errors without running the program.
.TP
.B program
If no
.B -f
options are supplied, the first non-option argument is taken to be a
string that contains an entire awk program, usually used for short
awk programs that can be entered in a single line.  Only one such
program may be used in this command format.
.TP
.B argument
Remaining arguments are taken as input files to the awk program, or
as assignments of the form var=string_value.
.\" ========================================================
.SH DIFFERENCES FROM POSIX AWK
.B wak
is intended to conform to the POSIX awk specification with some
omissions and additions. The major omission is locale support. The
program attempts to set its locale's LC_CTYPE to a UTF-8 locale if
it is not already set as such, and uses the native numeric locale,
but otherwise does not use the LC_* locale settings.
.PP
The major addition is the use of (extended) regular expressions as
values of RS, the record separator special variable. This is an
extension common to nearly all awk implementations, including gawk,
mawk, and the original (Unix) "One True Awk" (current version).
.PP
.\" ========================================================
.SH BUGS
This is a recent implementation, and as such, there are probably
quite a few bugs. Please report any bugs you find to
raygard at gmail dot com.
.\" ========================================================
.SH AUTHORS
Written by Ray Gardner, with contributions from Oliver K. Webb.
.\" ========================================================
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright 2024 Ray Gardner
.br
Released under the 0BSD license:
.br
Permission to use, copy, modify, and/or distribute this software for any
purpose with or without fee is hereby granted.
.br
THE SOFTWARE IS PROVIDED "AS IS" AND THE AUTHOR DISCLAIMS ALL WARRANTIES
WITH REGARD TO THIS SOFTWARE INCLUDING ALL IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF
MERCHANTABILITY AND FITNESS. IN NO EVENT SHALL THE AUTHOR BE LIABLE FOR
ANY SPECIAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, OR CONSEQUENTIAL DAMAGES OR ANY DAMAGES
WHATSOEVER RESULTING FROM LOSS OF USE, DATA OR PROFITS, WHETHER IN AN
ACTION OF CONTRACT, NEGLIGENCE OR OTHER TORTIOUS ACTION, ARISING OUT OF
OR IN CONNECTION WITH THE USE OR PERFORMANCE OF THIS SOFTWARE.
.\" ========================================================
.SH MISCELLANEOUS
Feel free to rename
.B wak
to awk if that does not conflict with your current installation
environment.
.PP
.B wak
is not as fast as mawk and not as full-featured as gawk, and is not
intended as a replacement or competitor to either, or to any other
implementation.
